In this video we'll talk about compiler warnings and why they happen.

Big tip don't ignore compiler warnings.

We'll talk more about that in a minute.

The compiler has noticed a potential problem in your code and it's warning you about it.

That's what compiler warnings are all about.

It's only a warning because the compiler is still able to understand your code and produce object code

from it.

However it's that you know to be aware that something could be problematic.

In this example we've declared a variable called miles driven and it's an integer it can hold any kind

of whole number.

Then on the next line we display the value of miles driven to the con..

The compiler produces a warning here it's warning us that you've used the variable miles driven but

you never initialized it.

So in other words the value that it contains could be anything.

Once again don't ignore compiler warnings.

Many programmers treat them as errors and fix the potential issues up front.

Let's head over to code light and we'll see some of these warnings.

So now I'm back in code like I've created a project called compiler warnings and again it's a default

project just simple Hello World.

Now what I'd like to do is let's use that favorite number variable again so let's create that here.

I'm going to say int space and the name of my variable let's call it.

Favorite number.

Perfect.

Now suppose I want to print out that favorite number.

So I'm going to remove this hello world right here and I'm just going to replace it with favorite number

so that's all I want to do.

I've got a favorite number I'm going to print it out now if I try to compile this syntactically there's

nothing wrong with this program but there is a problem with the compiler warning you right here.

It's saying favorite number is used uninitialized in this function.

So in other words you haven't told the compiler what the value of favorite number is.

You have asked the user to put anything into favorite number and you're going to print the compiler

telling you be careful because anything could print here and in this case anything will print here so

let's run this you can see what it looks like.

I'm going to run build and execute and look at what favorite number is for 0 0 9 7 1.

Probably not what you expected.

That's the reason for the warning.

The compiler is telling you you never set that variable to any specific value.

So when I.

Who knows what is going to be in there.

OK we'll talk more about that when we talk about variables.

So that's one of the issues that you could have another issue you can have is that me go back to hello

world here.

Another issue you can have is suppose that in this case.

Now we do assign something to that favorite number.

This is a favorite number is I don't know a hundred.

So look what we've done now.

We've created a variable.

We've assigned a value to the variable.

We haven't used it.

So the computer's thinking wait a minute did you plan to use that variable.

Why did you create a variable and not use it at all.

So will compile and the warning is variable favorite number set but not used.

OK so it's telling you are you sure you want this.

There's no reason for you to create a value and then not use it.

And similarly if I get rid of favorite number here and I just do something like that and compile There's

the warning again unused variable you've created a variable which you haven't even used it.

So what do you want.

The idea is you should have a no warnings policy in your code.

You should have a clean compiler with no warnings.

Now there's many many more warnings and will run into them when we talk about if statements and looping

and assigning and doing math and we'll talk more about those mornings when we get there.
