In this section of the Course will look at how C++ uses streams for IO first will learn what streams
are and how they help abstract the complexity away from working with different types of input and output
devices.
Then we'll learn about some of C++ history manipulators.
These are functions that can affect how we read and write data to and from streams them will learn about
some of C++ history manipulators.
These are functions that can affect how we read and write data to and from streams will learn about
stream manipulators that affect boolean integer and floating point values and then we'll use some manipulators
that work with any type of data to help us format or output these manipulators give us the ability to
align text fill blank areas with specific characters and set the width of output fields.
Then we'll do a challenge where we'll use the manipulators to format a report containing information
about tours to South America after the stream manipulators will learn about input files how to open
them check to see if they were open successfully read from them and then close them.
Read from using both formatted and an formatted IO and we'll do two challenges using input files.
The first is to create an automated grader that would grade student quiz responses from a text file
and produce a report of the results for the second challenge.
Well as a user for a word and see how many times that word appears in Shakespeare's play Romeo and Juliet
which is stored on a file and disk then we'll learn about output files and how they work well or to
open them right to them in both formatted and informatic modes and close them and then we'll do another
challenge that creates a copy of Romeo and Juliet but adds like numbers to the play that will wrap up
this section by looking at string streams.
This allows us to use in-memory strings as streams and use the same techniques that we use with files
with in-memory strings.
It's very powerful.
And we'll also see how we can use string streams for Data Validation as you'll see in this section.
IDS differ in where they store files for use within the IEEE.
In the last video of the section I'll show you how to set up external text files for reading and Visual
Studio code blocks Sea-Lion and X code.
OK we've got a lot to get to.
Let's get going.

