This video I'll take you through the steps necessary to install the C++ compiler on the Windows operating

system.

We're going to use the Minimalist GNU for Windows.

GNU stands for GNUs not Unix.

It's basically a compiler collection called GCC that includes the C compiler, C++ compiler, Fortran compiler,

and an Ada compiler.

We're only going to be using the C++ compiler in this class so we'll only install that .

Open up your favorite browser and you go to mingw.org. You'll see a page similar to this and what you want

to do on this page is click on the button at the top right here called 'Download Installer'.

So I'm going to select that and that'll automatically start a download of the MinGW installer.

It's a pretty small file, so it should be a quick download depending on your internet connection.

Ok so I'm finished downloading.

And what I want to do is just run that installer.

So I'm just going to double click on it and I'll close down the browser.

OK so what we're going to do here is we're basically just going to follow the installation wizard.

I'm going to install and I want to install in C:\MinGW

Now certainly this could be a different drive letter but don't change the name of the installation directory

and certainly don't put spaces or anything in there.

I'd suggest that you just keep the default if you can. Keep all the default settings and press continue

and this will start the download of the installation manager.

Now once the installation manager is downloaded then we can continue and we can start downloading and

installing the actual compiler.

OK, so when the download is complete, you can see that on my system it processed 113 items and it only

took a couple of minutes.

I sped up the video.

so you didn't have to wait through the installation.

Once you're finished, just press continue and you're going to be shown a window which is the installation

manager.

Now here what you want to do is you want to click Basic Set up on the left and you want to select three

of these packages on the right. You want to select the msys-base down near the bottom and you select

mark for installation.

You want to select the mingw32-gcc-g++

package. That package contains the C and the C++ compilers and will mark for

installation as well.

And you want to select the mingw-base package and we'll mark that for installation.

Now once you've got those three selected, you can come back up here to the installation menu and press

apply changes.

Now at this point we can click apply and it's going to download and install the new compiler.

OK, so that's the installation.

It only took a couple of minutes on my machine. I'll select to close.

And at this point we're done installing the compiler.

Now there's one step that you should take. In this case we want to set the path variable on our Windows

system to the binary directory.

So let me show you how to do that.

Open up your control panel. You can open it up down here or you can open it up right here. I've just got

a shortcut on my desktop and you can search your control panel for ENV for environment variables.

I'll just type ENV and you can select Edit the system environment variables.

OK.

Now at this point you want to come down here to where it says 'environment variables' and press that and then

down to 'system variables' and select the path right there and you want to edit the path. And what you

want to do is you want to add a new variable to the path.

So going to select new and at this point you want to browse and find the directory where you installed

the compiler libraries.

So in this case it was my C-Drive

and it was the MinGW directory and you want to go to the bin subdirectory and select that. That's where

the binaries are for the executive files and then press OK and OK one more time.

And just finish off and close everything up.

That's it.

The compiler system is now installed and we're ready to compile. The next step is if you're going to

install an integrated development environment or IDE now your compiler is all set up and you can proceed

with that step.
