In this video we'll use the command line tools to compile and run our C++ programs on the Windows platform.

Now obviously we need some sort of editor to type in our code.

I'm just going to use Notepad which is built into Windows and it's really really easy to use.

Couple of things first.

I've created a folder on my desktop called C.P. projects in there.

There's another folder called Project 1 inside Project 1 is where we're going to put our C++ file our

source code.

Now there's nothing in there right now.

I just wanted to show you where I'm going to be putting everything.

OK so the first thing I want to do is I just want to open up Notepad

and as you know Notepad is just a real simple text editor and I want to type in my C++ program right

into this textedit.

I'm just going to make a little bit smaller and open up another window in a moment.

So let's type in that main program that we should probably know by heart now.

So I'm going to say include IO stream

that I'm going to say int main.

Open and close parentheses.

Open curly bracket.

I'll close the curly bracket at the bottom.

Remember this is not an integrated development environment so it's not really getting help me with syntax

or with you no closing open brackets automatically and so forth.

I'll indent over a couple of spaces and I'll say c d to Kolins C out

to less than signs next to each other.

Which is the insertion operator and will say hello Windows command line.

It will close the string then we can also print a new line at the end.

That's all just say CD.

Colin Colin E and D L semi-colon that are just print a new line the precursor to the next line in the

output.

Here will say return 0.

Like we always do and then we just clean this up a little bit.

That's it we're done.

We don't need to save that program into that CPV projects projects one folder that I mentioned a minute

ago.

At this point you have to be a little careful because notepad works with text files so it's going to

use to fix the extensions.

We don't want to see extensions we want p extension so I'm going to go to File Save As and then I'm

going to go to my desktop.

My C-p projects and my project one folder Lolas here was this file named stardate text that's what I

don't want.

So I want to save as file type or just say all files that gets rid of the extension.

Now we could just Semaine that C-p that's going to save my file as main data.

And I'm going to save it so if I go to my directory structure now you'll see I have C.P projects projects

Project 1 and there's my main.

Now we need to compile and run this the way we do that and I'm going to leave this window open on here

on the left for a moment.

The way we do that is with the command shell or a command prompt and all you need to do is just run

command and you'll see where it says command prompt.

That's what we want to do.

We'll just press enter and run it and we get this window here and I'm just going to move it over here

on the right.

That way it's nice and big.

I notice first of all I'm in the wrong directory when the users Frank directory.

I want to be in that folder that I created so we can use the CD command to change directory.

This case I want to change directory to desktop and press enter.

And now you can see that I'm at the desktop.

They don't want to change into CPP projects and you can press tab and it will autocomplete for you someone

to press tab or to say CPV projects and then I want to go into project one.

There we go there and see if I want to see what's in that folder or just have Deodhar for directory

listing and you could see right there is my main TPP.

At this point I want to compile the way we compile is and then make this a little bit bigger so the

whole line will fit on here.

We want to use the C++ compiler the GWC plus plus compiler that I'm assuming is already installed.

We need to have that compiler installed plus plus that's the compiler.

Now we need to have those options Dasch w capital W all that turns your warnings on then s t d equals

sorry dash as to the equals C plus plus 14 that's using the C plus plus version 14 standard and then

the file we want to compile which in this case is main CPB that's it.

Now when I do this if there are no errors it's going to create an executive file called a doc xes.

So let's do that then we get a clean compile member.

No news is good news.

So no messages that's a good thing and we'll do Deodhar again.

You can see right here we have a file.

A dot see that's our executive.

I can run it by just typing.

And it says hello Windows command line which is exactly what our program is supposed to do if you want

a different name for the output.

We could just put another option on the command line.

And what I'm doing here now is I'm pressing the up arrow and it's going to go back through everything

I typed that went off to type everything again.

So we can go up or down you see up and down arrows.

So what I'm doing here is same thing I'm saying call my compiler turn on all warnings use to see post

plus 14 standard.

Compile this file right your main C.P and then you can use the dash.

Little o lowercase O.

And then the name of the file that you want to create the executive.

So let's say you want main got the X-C or whatever you like press enter and let me clear the screen

you can clear with CLX and I'll do it and the directory listing.

So now you can see I have an ADHD X-Sea and a main body X-C and I can simply run man that say this is

really really straightforward.

If you have issues with IDS if you have issues with hardware resources that you can't run an idea you

just don't like ideas.

You could certainly run C++ programs this way.

One thing to remember here when you type your program into an editor such as Notepad you may have syntax

errors.

So the way syntax errors will show up and let me get rid of that semi-colon there.

Now if I just say

compile again.

Notice I got a clean compile.

How can that be I took off a semicolon that shouldn't compile.

I forgot to save it.

You've got to be sure to save one of the things that the IDs do as they kind of do that automatically

for you so you don't have to think about it but when you're working in a workflow like this you've got

to be sure that whenever you edit your file you come up to a file save or control less.

Now you can compile again and there's your air.

So this is the way that you would work in this environment.

Obviously since it's not an integrated development environment it's not going to get a little arrow

here that says red and shows you where the error was because he thinks that two separate programs that

really aren't talking to one another.

But there's the air you can fix your error if you make another error let's say you forgot this quote

mark right here.

Again I'm saving the program I just did a control S and I can compile again and it says warning missing

terminating quote character.

OK you can fix that.

I'll save again and compile one more time.

We've got a clean compile.

We run main.

We get the output OK.

That's great.

So that's pretty much what there is to it.

It's not a big deal.

Obviously if you type G plus plus and this is a normal message right here fatal error no input files

it's you know it's asking me what you want to compile.

You haven't told me what you want but if you get a program not found error then go back to the installation

video from GW that I created and make sure that your path is set correctly because what's happening

is that Windows can't find C++.

OK so that takes care of Notepad.

Now there's another editor out there and I'm going to close this real quick.

There's another editor that's free it's called notepad plus plus and I've installed it on the system

on my computer here and you can see it's right here notepad plus plus on Precentor.

This is a programmer's editor.

And let me open the file I had a previous one opened all up it up and you can see file open you know

and open that C++ right here.

There you go.

So you can see that this is doing syntax highlighting it's doing code filtering it's got line numbers.

This is a programmer's editor and again it's called notepad plus plus it's absolutely free.

You can install.

You could do a google search and install it on your system.

Again it's not an I.D. but it's a more advanced programmer's editor which is really really nice.

And it's actually it's a lot nicer than Notepad Notepad was never intended to write code with but you

can certainly write code with it.

I'd recommend you use something like Notepad or bracket's or atom or one of the paid ones like sublime.

There's a lot of really good text editors out there that you can find.

OK so that wraps up this video.

As you can see if you've got issues with an idea or if you've got issues with hardware resources don't

let that stop you.

You can still learn C++ and you can still get your programs to compile and run really easily.
