This video show you a couple of options that allow you to run your C++ programs read in a web browser.

This is pretty nice because sometimes we're on the road you don't have your computer with you and you

want to take the course and try out some examples maybe you had an idea about an example you want to

try it up and nothing is available or to your friends house and there's no computer available there

except the browser.

All you need is a browser to run these.

One example is if you open up your favorite browser using Chrome here you can type in c p p s h that

C U R L and you get the C plus plus shell.

Now both of these examples I'm going to show you are rather limited compared to obviously running on

your own computer with an idea and so forth but they're really really handy when you need to try something

out really quickly without having to install a thing.

So in this case SH is the C++ shell you could type your program right in here on the browser and you

could see here I've typed in the hello world program and you could set options so you can set your C

plus plus 14 options your warnings to w all like we have in the examples and if you want to run your

program you can just select Run and it's going to compile and run it at the same time which is pretty

nice.

Also if the program asks for input which will get to a little bit later in the course you can sit that

to interactive mode so it'll be able to be able to type into the program which is kind of nice as well.

So in this case I want to run the program and you could see it's compiling program is running and the

output is hello world right here and the exit code is 0 which is our return 0.

That's pretty nice.

Now you can get a U R L which gets a u r l to what you did and you can click on that you were all you

got the program that you wrote back.

So that's obviously it storing it somewhere.

I'm not sure where or how long it's going to be available but you could figure that out if you like.

That's one example.

Another example is web compiler Dom cloud app.

This is a visual C++ compiler running in the web hits from Microsoft compiler and you can see that they've

given you a sample program here.

Now this text is pretty small.

Again it's a browser.

I'm going to make my browser a little bit bigger.

So you can see it and then make it a little smaller again to run it.

So you could see here it's including IO stream it's using a name space which we'll talk about a little

bit later and it's outputting Hello world.

And that might make this a little smaller again so when you run the program by clicking this purple

button down here there's your output right up here and this black window here.

Hello world.

Which is pretty nice.

And you can set your compiler flags however you like so in this case I'm setting the warnings to all

and I'm setting my standard compile with a C plus plus 14.

I'll close that down as soon as you can see.

This is a pretty nice option here.

We can get a compiler error.

Let's say we forget that semi-colon and we run then the compiler error shows up down here.

It says in function main on line 7.

Right here there is a semi-colon expected to actually get a little red little X there has you there's

right around here somewhere.

So you could fix your air and run it again.

And there you go there's your hello world.

So again these are some web based options.

They're not perfect.

You can't really save things and edit and do all kinds of good stuff but you can run a lot of the programs

that we're going to talk about in this class right in the C++ show on the web.
