Hello everyone in this video I'd like to show you how to use the source code that's provided with the

course.

Each section of the Course contains a compressed zip file that contains a workspace and all the projects

that I've created in that workspace.

So for example Suppose it were working on Section 8 will be a Section 8 zip file.

It may be a different name but it'll have everything you need in there.

And once you can do here is just extract that file and I'll extract here and I'm simply going to extract

it right to my desktop.

You can see the folders have all been extracted.

So if I double click on Section 8 you can see all the projects in there.

Now there's one special file you'll see done at the bottom here it's called Section 8 and it's a workspace

file.

If you right click on that you can open with code like and open up the workspace in code like.

And once the workspace is open you have access to all the projects in there.

So that's one way to do it.

Another way to do this is once you've extracted the file just open code like

OK.

So now once code light is opened you can choose to open a workspace right over here.

So select that open workspace and then you can just navigate to the workspace you want to open in this

case.

It's an it's Section 8 workspace you just simply select that file and you can see the workspace opens

up right here with all your projects.

Now I'm going to close the workspace and show you another way to do it would be right up here you just

come to workspace.

If you have a workspace that's already open you can simply workspace close.

It wouldn't be great out to be right there in this case I just want to open a workspace.

And I again you navigate to the workspace you want to open select it and there it is.

So now I've got Section 8 workspace with all the projects that I created and provided for you in order

to run these projects you simply double click the project you are interested in.

So suppose I'm interested in this uro's project you can see the source code and all you really need

to do is build and run.

But I'd suggest that you clean it first especially if you're going from Windows to PC to Linux.

I'm developing on Windows you're on a Mac or Linux machine or even a Windows machine it's always a good

idea to clean the project and what you can do you can right click and clean or you can come up to here

where it says build clean or clean the project that removes all the object files that X Files and just

gets rid of a bunch of stuff that you may need depending on your system.

Now that we've got that ready we can simply build and run and we should be get to go euros to us dollars

so we'll type in 100.

$119 is 100 euros.

So that's it.

It's really pretty straightforward.

What I would suggest is you create obviously your ordinate way of organizing your files.

I'd use folders or directory structures and also something that's important to understand as well with

code like code like does things a little differently.

So suppose that you've got projects in another workspace and then you select the workspace here and

you say add existing project.

Well what happens here is it doesn't actually copy that project into the workspace.

It'll create a new project in this workspace but the files will still be where they were before.

So you see Peepy files in your header files and everything will still be where they were.

So think of this more of a logical project rather than a physical copy of it.

OK but once you play around with it you'll understand exactly what's going on.

So really straightforward.

You've got the zip files that we're providing.

Unzip them.

You have a folder structure and then just open that workspace file in there.

All your projects should come in no problem at all.
