In this video we'll learn more about the priority queue the priority.
Q Is a container adapter just like the stack in the queue.
The Priority 2 allows insertions and removal of elements in order from the front of the container.
Elements are stored internally and vectors by default but a data structure called the heap is used behind
the scenes.
Don't confuse a heap data structure with the heap that we used to store dynamically allocated data in
our program.
There are totally different elements are inserted in priority order so the largest priority element
will always be at the front of the priority queue.
That's pretty cool.
We can insert elements at the front end when we get an element from the front.
We're guaranteed that it will be the largest element in the container and it's super efficient.
Iterators make no sense with priority queues so they're not supported and neither are the ACL algorithms.
In order to use the priority queue we must include the queue header file the prior to to has just a
couple of methods that are superpowerful the push method inserts an element into the priority queue
in sorted order.
The pop method removes the top element from the priority queue and the top method accesses the top element
without removing the top element will always be the highest priority element which defaults to the element
with the greatest value.
Finally we have the empty inside methods as we have seen before.
So let's see a simple example of using the priority queue.
First we create a priority or call it P.
Behind the scenes it's using the vector as the underlying container.
Then we push for integers onto the priority queue and then we display the top with P-Q top.
In this case 20 will be displayed because 20 was the largest element inserted into the priority queue.
We can remove the element from the top with P-Q up pop and if we display the top again will display
10.
Since 10 is the next largest integer that was added to the priority queue that's it.
It's really very simple and very powerful.
Let's head over to the idea and I'll show you an example of using a priority queue.
OK so I'm back in the IDM in the Section 20 workspace and I'm in the priority queue project so what
we'll do here is we'll play around with the priority here will do it both with integers and will do
it with an object here a person objects.
So I'm including you.
That's where the priority queue lives.
So I need to include that to make sure that we have access to it.
We got our good person class that we've been using throughout this section and again it's same as it
has been before.
This is the really important one right here and that an operator less than an overload less than operator.
That's what we're going to use in a moment.
So remember what it's doing.
Well actually what we'll do is we'll use that name will change it.
So remember what it's doing here it's comparing ages so that's the ordering that it's going to use and
that's what the priority uses as well.
And let's see we've got the overloaded insertion operator exactly like we did before.
I've got a template function here that expects a priority queue of any type and it displays it.
This is destructive so I'm passing by value.
You've probably seen this a bunch of times now with queues in stacks and you're getting used to it.
So I'm just getting that while it's not empty.
I'm getting the top which is the biggest element.
I'm popping it and printing it until it's empty.
All right so that's what's happening there.
So let's take a look at these two tests.
Test 1 I'm creating a priority queue and I'm looping through this collection of integers here and I'm
pushing it onto the queue.
The priority here should say remember what's happening here is when they're being pushed in everything
the pushing all happens at the top.
But behind the scenes it's ordering so it's using a data structure behind the scenes so the top of this
priority queue will always be the largest integer.
Now in this case notice I have 3 5 7 here and I have three 5:7 here.
The duplicates will be put in there and it's OK to have duplicates in priority so that's why I put them
in there so that's what we're doing here we're pushing all of those integers and then what's the size.
Well I pushed 12 of them.
What's the top one.
It's the biggest one that hundred right there.
When I display the priority queue you can see 123 12 12 7 7 all the way down to zero.
He could see the ordering is exactly as we would expect the top which is right there is that hundred
right there.
That is the greatest or the largest integer in the prior to q.
So let me clear this up.
So now what I do is.
Pop that Max element from the priority queue.
So that's going to take the hundred off and then when I display the priority queue.
Now the new top is 23.
The next largest number that was there.
That's really all there is to a priority queue.
Superpowerful a lot of times you will have needs for something like this.
Let's say we're doing operating systems and we're skell scheduling jobs and they have to run based on
a certain priority.
This is awesome news priories use all the time because they make a lot of sense and they're super efficient.
So let's take a look at test to test to have created a priority queue right here P-Q again.
Of Person objects this time and I'm pushing a bunch of person objects now.
I named these people A through F just so we can see the ordering with the string and then I've got some
just random numbers here.
We can see that the largest number is 27 remember before we said that the operator less than for the
person class was checking age.
That's the discriminant.
So in this case when we put these things on these personal objects on the priority queue what we display
the priority to the quote we're getting here notice that it's not ordered by name we're get a and CNA
and Ian be it's ordered by that age.
So the person with the largest age is at the top of the priority queue.
So we've got 27 18 14 10 7 and down to 1.
That's it.
That's pretty cool.
So if I decided to just stop this in if I decided to change the order remember right here as ordered
by age so if I decided to come up here to my person class and we scroll up a little bit right here and
let's say that I want to change this so it doesn't check.
Age Instead it will do the same name.
So we're going to return this to this dash name less than the right hand side name something like that.
Now when we run this again you can see the output right over here.
I move that over a little bit so I can write.
You can see the output right here now.
He's no longer by age right.
He just happens to be 27 there because of the F but it's F E D C B.
Right.
So f is the largest name.
The other way we've got ABC right.
So there you go.
So if I remove the top it's going to remove 27 right there.
That's it.
That's it for the priority queues.
Very useful data structure to know about dead simple to use in C++ with the standard template library.
A lot of other programming languages have libraries that support just about everything that's in the
SPL and they're all pretty easy to use actually.
What's really important is that you practice and you understand the SPL.
You just do a lot of examples.
I did a lot of examples in these videos and I did that like I said for a reason that's really the best
way to learn this is to just go along with me and tweak yours and makers different and change like I
just did right here.
You know change this and see what the effect is.
And that's how you really really learn this stuff.
All right.
So that is actually the end of the horæ right.
It ended up being a lot longer than I thought it was going to be I rerecorded some videos and I hope
it's useful to you all.

